---
title: "dui: like du, but interactive"
date: 2023-07-30T11:00:00-04:00
classes:
  - wide
categories:
  - projects
tags:
  - tools
---

Sometimes I just want to know why my computer's disk is full. `du` will give me a firehose of information, but it's slow and the results are hard to parse. I don't need to know the size of every file, just which directories happen to be taking up a lot of bytes. I could download a file size visualizer from the internet, but that feels like overkill.

To make it easier to solve this problem, I wrote an interactive CLI utility that I've called [`dui`](https://crates.io/crates/dui) (because it's like `du`, but interactive). I wanted it to be fast, so I wrote it in Rust. It's [open source](https://gitlab.com/GregOwen/dui) (MIT license).

# Using `dui`

Since `dui` is published to crates.io, you can get it by running `cargo install dui`.

If you point it at a directory, it will give you an interactive tree view of all of the files in that directory, along with their size in bytes:

```
┗⊟ ".": 27.8 KB (100.00%)
  ┣⊞ "src": 23.5 KB (84.47%)
  ┣⊡ "README.md": 2.2 KB (8.00%)
  ┣⊡ "LICENSE": 1 KB (3.73%)
  ┣⊡ "Cargo.toml": 451 B (1.58%)
  ┗⊡ "rustfmt.toml": 247 B (0.87%)
```

You can navigate up and down different levels of the hierarchy and expand or collapse individual directories to dig deeper:

```
┗⊟ ".": 27.8 KB (100.00%)
  ┣⊟ "src": 23.5 KB (84.47%)
  ┃ ┣⊟ "cli": 17.9 KB (76.36%)
  ┃ ┃ ┣⊡ "render.rs": 9.1 KB (50.55%)
  ┃ ┃ ┣⊡ "handler.rs": 5.3 KB (29.66%)
  ┃ ┃ ┗⊡ "mod.rs": 3.4 KB (18.92%)
  ┃ ┣⊡ "crawl.rs": 3.8 KB (16.36%)
  ┃ ┣⊡ "main.rs": 1.5 KB (6.36%)
  ┃ ┗⊡ "lib.rs": 28 B (0.12%)
  ┣⊡ "README.md": 2.2 KB (8.00%)
  ┣⊡ "LICENSE": 1 KB (3.73%)
  ┣⊡ "Cargo.toml": 451 B (1.58%)
  ┗⊡ "rustfmt.toml": 247 B (0.87%)
```

You can also use it to check the number of files rather than the size in bytes[^why-num-files] by passing the `--type num_files` argument:

```
┗⊟ ".": 13 (100.00%)
  ┣⊟ "src": 8 (61.54%)
  ┃ ┣⊟ "cli": 4 (50.00%)
  ┃ ┃ ┣⊡ "mod.rs": 1 (25.00%)
  ┃ ┃ ┣⊡ "render.rs": 1 (25.00%)
  ┃ ┃ ┗⊡ "handler.rs": 1 (25.00%)
  ┃ ┣⊡ "lib.rs": 1 (12.50%)
  ┃ ┣⊡ "crawl.rs": 1 (12.50%)
  ┃ ┗⊡ "main.rs": 1 (12.50%)
  ┣⊡ "README.md": 1 (7.69%)
  ┣⊡ "rustfmt.toml": 1 (7.69%)
  ┣⊡ "Cargo.toml": 1 (7.69%)
  ┗⊡ "LICENSE": 1 (7.69%)
```

# Implementation

The Rust ecosystem makes creating CLI utilities like really straightforward. The examples above are from running `dui` on its own source repo; you can see how little of my own code I had to write to build `dui`.

[clap](https://docs.rs/clap/latest/clap/) makes parsing CLI arguments as easy as defining a struct (and gives you `--help` and `--version` for free as a nice little lagniappe).

[crossterm](https://docs.rs/crossterm/latest/crossterm/) makes it super easy to build an interactive CLI that should hopefully be cross-platform out of the box.

[ignore](https://docs.rs/ignore/latest/ignore/), despite the odd name, is a cross-platform parallelizable file tree walker, which meant that I didn't need to write any code that actually interacted with the filesystem. It's part of Andrew Gallant's excellent [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep), which I've [talked about previously](https://stegosaurusdormant.com/emacs-ripgrep/).

Given how fast this was to set up, I feel like I can add a new tool to my command line problem-solving toolbox, for when tasks become too heavy for the other tools:

1. run a one-off bash command
1. write a bash script
1. write a Python script
1. write a one-file Go module
1. write a Rust CLI <-- new


[^why-num-files]: I recently had to do this because Emacs was complaining about having to maintain too many file watchers; turns out `emacs-lsp` was trying to [watch all of the Bazel files](https://github.com/emacs-lsp/lsp-mode/pull/4037) in one of my Git submodules.
